John Steinbeck was born in Salinas, California. His father
was active in local politics and had been county treasurer, and
ms mother was a school teacher in the Big Sur country. The
world beyond the rugged mountains held little attraction for
young Steinbeck, and it was not until he was nineteen that he
ventured out of them to enroll in Leland Stanford University.
I here he confined his studies to whatever happened to inter-
est him, and he never troubled to take a degree. He came to
New York via the Panama Canal by a freight boat and worked
at casual jobs as a newspaperman, a hod-carrier during- the
construction of Madison Square Garden, a chemist, a painter’s
apprentice and a day laborer. His first book, Cup of Gold
was published in 1929. It was followed, in 1932, by The Pas-
tures of Heaven and To a God Unknown. The public’s indif-
ference to these early works may have been discouraging
but its response to T ortilla Flat in 1935 was quick and hearten-
mg. In 1936, his In Dubious Battle rallied many new readers
and gave them the first promise of all that would be fulfilled
three years later in The Grapes of Wrath. The following year
Steinbeck tried the experiment of writing a short novel as if
it were a play. Of Mice and Men was an instantaneous success
as a novel, and, with hardly a word changed, was a sensation
on the stage and screen. There followed a book of short
stories. The Long Valley, and in 1939, Steinbeck rose to his
greatest height as an artist with the novel that is conceded to
be one of the strongest and most compassionate of our time.
The Grapes of Wrath. More recently he wrote the story and
foreword for a book of photographs for a motion picture of
Mexican life, The Forgotten Village, and a forthcoming book,
written in collaboration with Edward F. Ricketts, the marine
biologist, is an account of a scientific trip through the Gulf
of California. T O THE red country and part of the gray country of
Oklahoma, the last rains came gently, and they did
not cut the scarred earth. The plows crossed and
recrossed the rivulet marks. The last rains lifted the corn
quickly and scattered weed colonies and grass along the sides
of the roads so that the gray country and the dark red coun-
try began to disappear under a green cover. In the last part
of May the sky grew pale and the clouds that had hung in
high puffs for so long in the spring were dissipated. The sun
flared down on the growing corn day after day until a line
of brown spread along the edge of each green bayonet. The
clouds appeared, and went away, and in a while they did not
try any more. The weeds grew darker green to protect them-
selves, and they did not spread any more. The surface of the
earth crusted, a thin hard crust, and as the sky became pale,
so the earth became pale, pink in the red country and white
in the gray country. In the water-cut gullies the earth dusted down in dry lit-
tle streams. Gophers and ant lions started small avalanches.
And as the sharp sun struck day after day, the leaves of the
young corn became less stiff and erect; they bent in a curve
at first, and then, as the central ribs of strength, grew weak,
each leaf tilted downward. Then it was June, and the sun
shone more fiercely. The brown lines on the com leaves
widened and moved in on the central ribs. The weeds frayed and edged back toward their roots. The air was thin and the
sky more pale; and every day the earth paled. In the roads where the teams moved, where the wheels
milled the ground and the hooves of the horses beat the
ground, the dirt crust broke and the dust formed. Every
moving thing lifted the dust into the air: a walking man
lifted a thin layer as high as his waist, and a wagon lifted the
dust as high as the fence tops, and an automobile boiled a
cloud behind it. The dust was long in settling back again.
When June was half gone, the big clouds moved up out
of Texas and the Gulf, high heavy clouds, rain-heads. The
men in the fields looked up at the clouds and sniffed at them
and held wet fingers up to sense the wind. And the horses
were nervous while the clouds were up. The rain-heads
dropped a little spattering and hurried on to some other
country. Behind them the sky was pale again and the sun
flared. In the dust there were drop craters where the rain
had fallen, and there were clean splashes on the com, and
that was all.
A gentle wind followed the rain clouds, driving them on
northward, a wind that softly clashed the drying corn. A
day went by and the wind increased, steady, unbroken by
gusts. The dust from the roads fluffed up and spread out and
fell on the weeds beside the fields, and fell into the fields a
little way. Now the wind grew strong and hard and it
worked at the rain crust in the corn fields. Little by little the
sky was darkened by the mixing dust, and the wind felt over
the earth, loosened the dust, and carried it away. The wind
grew stronger. The rain crust broke and the dust lifted up
out of the fields and drove gray plumes into the air like slug-
gish smoke. The corn threshed the wind and made a dry.
rushing sound. The finest dust did not settle back to earth
now, but disappeared into the darkening sky.
The wind grew stronger, whisked under stones, carried up
straws and old leaves, and even little clods, marking its
course as it sailed across the fields. The air and the sky dark-
ened and through them the sun shone redly, and there was a
raw sting in the air. During a night the wind raced faster
over the land, dug cunningly among the rootlets of the com,
and the corn fought the wind with its weakened leaves until
the roots were freed by the prying wind and then each stalk
settled wearily sideways toward the earth and pointed the
direction of the wind.
The dawn came, but no day. In the gray sky a red sun
appeared, a dim red circle that gave a little light, like dusk;
and as that day advanced, the dusk slipped back toward
darkness, and the wind cried and whimpered over the fallen
com.Men and women huddled in their houses, and they tied
handkerchiefs over their noses when they went out, and
wore goggles to protect their eyes.
When the night came again it was black night, for the
stars could not pierce the dust to get down, and the window
lights could not even spread beyond their own yards. Now
the dust was evenly mixed with the air, an emulsion of dust
and air. Houses were shut tight, and cloth wedged around
doors and windows, but the dust came in so thinly that it
could not be seen in the air, and it settled like pollen on the
chairs and tables, on the dishes. The people brushed it from
their shoulders. Little lines of dust lay at the door sills.
In the middle of that night the wind passed on and left
the land quiet. The dust-filled air muffled sound more com-
pleteiy than fog does. The people, lying in their beds, heard
the wind stop. They awakened when the rushing wind was
gone. They lay quietly and listened deep into the stillness.
Then the roosters crowed, and their voices were muffled,
and the people stirred restlessly in their beds and wanted the
morning. They knew it would take a long time for the dust
to settle out of the air. In the morning the dust hung like
fog, and the sun was as red as ripe new blood. All day the
dust sifted down from the sky, and the next day it sifted
down. An even blanket covered the earth. It settled on the
com, piled up on the tops of the fence posts, piled up on
the wires; it settled on roofs, blanketed the weeds and trees.
The people came out of their houses and smelled the hot
stinging air and covered their noses from it. And the chil-
dren came out of the houses, but they did not run or shout
as they would have done after a rain. Men stood by their
fences and looked at the ruined corn, drying fast now, only a
little green showing through the film of dust. The men were
silent and they did not move often. And the women came out
of the houses to stand beside their men— to feel whether this
time the men would break. The women studied the men’s
faces secretly, for the com could go, as long as something
else remained. The children stood near by, drawing figures
in the dust with bare toes, and the children sent exploring
senses out to see whether men and women would break. The
children peeked at the faces of the men and women, and
then drew careful lines in the dust with their toes. Horses
came to the watering troughs and nuzzled the water to clear
the surface dust. After a while the faces of the watching men
lost their bemused perplexity and became hard and angry
and resistant. Then the women knew that they were safe and
that there was no break. Then they asked, What’ll we do?

Ind the men replied, I don’t know. But it was all right.
The women knew it was all right, and the watching children
knew it was all right. Women and children knew deep in
themselves that no misfortune was too great to bear if their
men were whole. The women went into the houses to their
work, and the children began to play, but cautiously at first.
As the day went forward the sun became less red. It flared
down on the dust-blanketed land. The men sat in the door-
ways of their houses; their hands were busy with sticks and
little rocks. The men sat still-thinking— figuring*

A HUGE red transport truck stood in front of the, lit-
tle roadside restaurant. The vertical exhaust pipe
L muttered softly, and an almost invisible haze of steel-
blue smoke hovered over its end. It was a new truck, shining
red, and in twelve-inch letters on its sides— OKLAHOMA
CITY TRANSPORT COMPANY. Its double tires were
new, and a brass padlock stood straight out from the hasp
on the big back doors. Inside the screened restaurant a
radio played, quiet dance music turned low the way It Is
when no one is listening. A small outlet fan turned silently in
its circular hole over the entrance, and flies buzzed excitedly
about the doors and windows, butting the screens. Inside,
one man, the truck driver, sat on a stool and rested his el-
bows on the counter and looked over his coffee at the lean
and lonely waitress. He talked the smart listless language of
the roadsides to her. “I seen him about three months ago.
He had a operation. Cut somepin out. I forget what.” And
she— “Doesn’t seem no longer than a week I seen him
myself. Looked fine then. He’s a nice sort of a guy when
he ain’t stinko.” Now and then the flies roared softly at the
screen door. The coffee machine spurted steam, and the
waitress, without looking, reached behind her and shut it off.

Outside, a man walking along the edge of the highway
crossed over and approached the truck. He walked slowly
to the front of it, put his hand on the shiny fender, and

looked at the No Riders sticker on the windshield. For a
moment he was about to walk on down the road, but instead
he sat on the running board on the side away from the res-
taurant. He was not over thirty. His eyes were very dark
brown and there was a hint of brown pigment in his eyeballs.
His cheek bones were high and wide, and strong deep lines
cut down his cheeks, in curves beside his mouth. His upper
lip was long, and since his teeth protruded, the lips stretched
to cover them, for this man kept his lips closed. His hands
: were hard, with broad fingers and nails as thick and ridged
as little clam shells. The space between thumb and forefinger
and the hams of his hands were shiny with callus.

The man’s clothes were new-all of them, cheap and new.
His gray cap was so new that the visor was still stiff and the
button still on, not shapeless and bulged as it would be when
it had served for a while all the various purposes of a cap-
carrying sack, towel, handkerchief. His suit was of cheap
gray hardcloth and so new that there were creases in the
trousers. His blue chambray shirt was stiff and smooth with
filler. The coat was too big, the trousers too short, for he
was a tall man.. The coat shoulder peaks hung down on his
arms, and even then the sleeves were too short and the front
of the coat flapped loosely over his stomach. He wore a
pair of new tan shoes of the kind called “army last,” hob-
nailed and with half-circles like horseshoes to protect the
edges of the heels from wear. This man sat on the running
board and took off his cap and mopped his face with it. Then
he put on the cap, and by pulling started the future ruin
of the visor. His feet caught his attention. He leaned down
and loosened the shoelaces, and did not tie the ends again.
Over his head the exhaust of the Diesel engine whispered in
quick puffs of blue smoke.

The music stopped in the restaurant and a man’s voice
spoke from the loudspeaker, but the waitress did not turn
him off, for she didn’t know the music had stopped. Her ex-
ploring fingers had found a lump under her ear. She was.
trying to see it in a mirror behind the counter without let-
ting the truck driver know, and so she pretended to push a
bit of hair to neatness. The truck driver said, “They was a
big dance in Shawnee. I heard somebody got killed or some-
pin. You hear anything?” “No,” said the waitress, and she
lovingly fingered the lump under her ear.

Outside, the seated man stood up and looked over the
cowl of the truck and watched the restaurant for a moment.
Then he settled back on the running board, pulled a sack
of tobacco and a book of papers from his side pocket. He
rolled his cigarette slowly and perfectly, studied it, smoothed
it. At last he lighted it and pushed the burning match into the
dust at his feet. The sun cut into the shade of the truck as
noon approached.

In the restaurant the truck driver paid his bill and put his
two nickels’ change in a slot machine. The whirling cylin-
ders gave him no score. “They fix ’em so you can’t win
nothing,” he said to the waitress.

And she replied, “Guy took the jackpot not two hours
ago. Three-eighty he got. How soon you gonna be back
by?”

He held the screen door a little open. “Week-ten days,”
he said. “Got to make a run to Tulsa, an’ I never get back
soon as I think.”

She said crossly, “Don’t let the flies in. Either go out or
come in.”

“So long,” he said, and pushed his way out. The screen
door banged behind him. He stood in the sun, peeling the

wrapper from a piece of gum. He was a heavy man, broad
in the shoulders, thick in the stomach. His face was red and
his blue eyes long and slitted from having squinted always
at sharp light. He wore army trousers and high laced boots.
Holding the stick of gum in front of his lips he called
through the screen, “Well, don’t do nothing you don’t want
me to hear about.” The waitress was turned toward a mirror
on the back wall. She grunted a reply. The truck driver
gnawed down the stick of gum slowly, opening his jaws and
lips wide with each bite. He shaped the gum in his mouth,
rolled it under his tongue while he walked to the big red
truck.

The hitch-hiker stood up and looked across through the
windows. “Could ya give me a lift, mister?”

The driver looked quickly back at the restaurant for a sec-
ond. “Didn’ you see the No Riders sticker on the win’shield?”

“Sure— I seen it. But sometimes a guy’ll be a good guy even
if some rich bastard makes him carry a sticker.”

The driver, getting slowly into the truck, considered the
parts of this answer. If he refused now, not only was he not
a good guy, but he was forced to carry a sticker, was not
allowed to have company. If he took in the hitch-hiker he
was automatically a good guy and also he was not one whom
any rich bastard could kick around. He knew he was being
trapped, but he couldn’t see a way out. And he wanted to
be a good guy. He glanced again at the restaurant. “Scrunch
down on the running board till we get around the bend,”
he said.

The hitch-hiker flopped down out of sight and clung to
the door handle. The motor roared up for a moment, the
gears clicked in, and the great truck moved away, first gear,
>e'cond gear, third gear., and then a high whining pick-up an4


22 The Grapes of Wrath

fourth gear. Under the clinging man the highway blurred
dizzily by. It was a mile to the first turn in the road, then
the truck slowed down. The hitch-hiker stood up, eased the
door open, and slipped into the seat. The driver looked over
at him, slitting his eyes, and he chewed as though thoughts
and impressions were being sorted and arranged by his jaws
before they were finally filed away in his brain. His eyes
began at the new cap, moved down the new clothes to the
new shoes. The hitch-hiker squirmed his back against the
seat in comfort, took off his cap, and swabbed his sweating
forehead and chin with it. “Thanks, buddy,” he said. “My
dogs was pooped out.”

“New shoes,” said the driver. His voice had the same qual-
ity of secrecy and insinuation his eyes had. “You oughtn’ to
take no walk in new shoes— hot weather.”

The hiker looked down at the dusty yellow shoes. “Didn’t
have no other shoes,” he said. “Guy got to wear ’em if he
grot no others.”

The driver squinted judiciously ahead and built up the
speed of the truck a little. “Coin’ far?”

“Uh-uh! Fd a walked her if my dogs wasn’t pooped out.”

The questions of the driver had the tone of a subtle exam-
ination. He seemed to spread nets, to set traps with his ques-
tions. “Lookin’ for a job?” he asked.

“No, my old man got a place, forty acres. He’s a cropper,
but we been there a long time.”

The driver looked significantly at the fields along the road
where the com was fallen sideways and the dust was piled
on it. Little flints shoved through the dusty soil. The driver
said, as though to himself, “A forty-acre cropper and he
ain’t been dusted out and he ain’t been tractored out?”

'‘Long time,” said the driver. A bee flew into the cab and
buzzed in back of the windshield. The driver put out his
hand and carefully drove the bee into an air stream that blew
it out of the window. “Croppers going fast now,” he said.
“One cat’ takes and shoves ten families out. Cat’s all over hell
now. Tear in and shove the croppers out. How’s your old
man hold on?” His tongue and his jaws became busy with
the neglected gum, turned it and chewed it. With each open-
ing of his mouth his tongue could be seen flipping the gum
over.

“Well, I ain’t heard lately. I never was no hand to write,
nor my old man neither.” He added quickly, “But the both
of us can, if we want.”

“Been doing a job?” Again the secret investigating casual-
ness. He looked out over the fields, at the shimmering air,
and gathering his gum into his cheek, out of the way, he spat
out the window.

“Sure have,” said the hitch-hiker.

“Thought so. I seen your hands. Been swingin’ a pick or an
ax or a sledge. That shines up your hands. I notice all stuff
like that. Take a pride in it.”

The hitch-hiker stared at him. The truck tires sang on the
road. “Like to know anything else? I’ll tell you. You ain’t
got to guess.”

“Now don’t get sore. I wasn’t gettin’ nosy.”

“I’ll tell you anything. I ain’t hidin’ nothin’.”

‘‘Now don’t get sore. I just like to notice things. Makes the
time pass.”

“I’ll tell you anything. Name’s Joad, Tom Joa d. Old man
is ol’ Tom Joad.” His eyes rested broodingly on the driver.

“Don’t get sore. I didn’t mean nothin’.”

“I don’t mean nothin’ neither,” said Joad. “I’m just tryirf

to get along without shovin' nobody around." He stopped
and looked out at the dry fields, at the starved tree clumps
hanging uneasily in the heated distance. From his side pocket
he brought out his tobacco and papers. He rolled his cigarette
down between his knees, where the wind could not get at it.

The driver chewed as rhythmically, as thoughtfully, as a
cow. He waited to let the whole emphasis of the preceding
passage disappear and be forgotten. At last, when the air
seemed neutral again, he said, “A guy that never been a truck
skinner don't know nothin’ what it’s like. Owners don't want
us to pick up nobody. So we got to set here an' just skin her
along 'less we want to take a chance of gettln' fired like I just
done with you."

“ 'Predate it," said Joad.

“I’ve knew guys that done screwy things while they're
drivin' trucks. I remember a guy use’ to make up poetry. It
passed the time.” He looked over secretly to see whether
Joad was interested or amazed. Joad was silent, looking into
the distance ahead, along the road, along the white road that
waved gently, like a ground swell. The driver went on at last,
“I remember a piece of poetry this here guy wrote down. It
was about him an’ a couple other guys goin' all over the
world drinkin’ and raisin’ hell and screwin’ around. I wisht 1
could remember how that piece went. This guy had words
in it that Jesus H. Christ wouldn't know what they meant.
Part was like this: ‘An’ there we spied a nigger, with a
trigger that was bigger than a elephant’s proboscis or the
whanger of a whale.’ That proboscis is a nose-like. With a
elephant it’s his trunk. Guy showed me in a dictionary. Car-
ried that dictionary all over hell with him. He’d look in it
while he’s pulled up gettin’ his pie an’ coffee,” He stopped.

feeling lonely in the long speech. His secret eyes turned on
his passenger. Joad remained silent. Nervously the driver
tried to force him into participation. “Ever know a guy that
said big words like that?”

“Preacher,” said Joad.

“W ell, it makes you mad to hear a guy use big words.
'Course with a preacher it’s all right because nobody would
fool around with a preacher anyway. But this guy was
funny. You didn’t give a damn when he said a big word
’cause he just done it for ducks. He wasn’t puttin’ on no
dog.” The driver was reassured. He knew at least that Joad
was listening. He swung the great truck viciously around a
bend and the tires shrilled. “Like I was sayin’,” he continued,
“guy that drives a truck does screwy things. He got to. He’d
go nuts just settin’ here an’ the road sneakin’ under the
wheels. Fella says once that truck skinners eats all the time-
all the time in hamburger joints along the road.”

“Sure seem to live there,” Joad agreed.

“Sure they stop, but it ain’t to eat. They ain’t hardly ever
hungry. They’re just goddam sick of goin’— get sick of it.
Joints is the only place you can pull up, an’ when you stop
you got to buy somepin so you can sling the bull with the
broad behind the counter. So you get a cup a coffee and a
piece pie. Kind of gives a guy a little rest.” He chewed his
gum slowly and turned it with his tongue.

“Must be tough,” said Joad with no emphasis.

The driver glanced quickly at him, looking for satire.
“Well, it ain’t no goddamn cinch,” he said testily. “Looks
easy, jus’ settin’ here till you put in your eight or maybe
your ten or fourteen hours. But the road gets into a guy.
He’s got to do somepin. Some sings an’ some whistles. Com-
pany won’t let us have no radio. A few takes a pint along*
but them kind don’t stick long.” He said the last smugly. “I
don’t never take a drink till I’m through.”

“Yeah?” Joad asked.

“Yeah! A guy got to get ahead. Why, I’m thinkin’ of
takin’ one of them correspondence school courses. Mechani-
cal engineering. It’s easy. Just study a few easy lessons at
home. Fm thinkin’ of it. Then I won’t drive no truck. Then
I’ll tell other guys to drive trucks.”

Joad took a pint of whisky from his side coat pocket.
“Sure you won’t have a snort?” His voice was teasing.

“No, by God. I won’t touch it. A guy can’t drink liquor
all the time and study like Fm goin’ to.”

Joad uncorked the bottle, took two quick swallows, re-
corked it, and put it back in his pocket. The spicy hot smell
of the whisky filled the cab. “You’re all wound up,” said
joad. ‘What’s the matter— got a girl?”

“Well, sure. But I want to get ahead anyway. I been train-
ing my mind for a hell of a long time.”

The whisky seemed to loosen Joad up. He rolled another
cigarette and lighted it. “I ain’t got a hell of a lot further tc
go,” he said.
The driver went on quickly, “I don’t need no shot,” he
said. “I train my mind all the time. I took a course in that
two years ago.” He patted the steering wheel with his right
hand. “Suppose I pass a guy on the road. I look at him, an’
after Fm past I try to remember ever’thing about him, kind
a clothes an’ shoes an’ hat, an’ how he walked an’ maybe
how tall an’ what weight an’ any scars. I do it pretty good.

I can jus’ make a whole picture in my head. Sometimes I
think I ought to take a course to be a fingerprint expert.
You’d be su’prised how much a guy can remember.”


The Grapes of Wrath ty

Joad took a quick drink from the flask. He dragged the
last smoke from his raveling cigarette and then, with cal-
Jused thumb and forefinger, crushed out the glowing end.
He rubbed the butt to a pulp and put it out the window,
letting the breeze suck it from his fingers. The big tires sang
a high note on the pavement. Joad’s dark quiet eyes became
amused as he stared along the road. The driver waited and
glanced uneasily over. At last Joad’s long upper lip grinned
up from his teeth and he chuckled silently, his chest jerked
with the chuckles. i You sure took a hell of a long time to o-et
to it, buddy.”

The driver did not look over. “Get to what? How do you
mean? ”
Joad’s lips stretched tight over his long teeth for a mo-
ment, and he licked his lips like a dog, two licks, one in each
direction from the middle. His voice became harsh. “You
know what I mean. You give me a goin’-over when I first
got in. I seen you.” The driver looked straight ahead, gripped
the wheel so tightly that the pads of his palms bulged, and
the backs of his hands paled. Joad continued, “You know
where I come from.” The driver was silent. “Don’t you?”
Joad insisted.
"Well-sure. That is— maybe. But it ain’t none of my busi-
ness. I mind my own yard. It ain’t nothing to me.” The
words tumbled out now. “I don’t stick my nose in nobody’s
business. And suddenly he was silent and waiting. And his
hands were still white on the wheel. A grasshopper flipped
through the window and lighted on top of the instrument
panel, where it sat and began to scrape its wings with its
angled jumping legs. Joad reached forward and crushed its
hard skull-like head with his fingers, and he let it into the
wind stream out the window. Joad chuckled again while he
brushed the bits of broken Insect from his fingertips* “You
got me wrong, mister,” he said* “I ain’t keepin’ quiet about
It* Sure I been In McAlester. Been there four years. Sure
these is the clothes they give me when I come out. I don’t
give a damn who knows it. An’ I’m goin’ to my old man’s
place so I don’t have to lie to get a job.”

The driver said, “Well— that ain’t none of my business. I
ain’t a nosy guy.”

‘The hell you ain’t,” said joad. “That big old nose of
yours been stickin’ out eight miles ahead of your face. You
had that big nose goin’ over me like a sheep in a vegetable
patch.” %

The driver’s face tightened. “You got me all wrong—” he
began weakly.

Joad laughed at him. “You been a good guy. You give me
a lift. Well, hell! I done time. So what! You want to know
what I done time for, don’t you?”

“That ain’t none of my affair.”

“Nothin’ ain’t none of your affair except skinnin’ this here
bull-bitch along, an’ that’s the least thing you work at. Now
look. See that road up ahead?”

“Yeah.”

“Well, I get off there. Sure, I know you’re wettin’ your
pants to know what I done. I ain’t a guy to let you down.”
The high hum of the motor dulled and the song of the tires
dropped in pitch, joad got out his pint and took another
short drink. The truck drifted to a stop where a dirt road
opened at right angles to the highway. Joad got out and stood
beside the cab window. The vertical exhaust pipe puttered
up its barely visible blue smoke, joad leaned toward the
driver. “Homicide,” he said quickly* ‘That’s a big word—
means I killed a guy. Seven years. I’m sprung in four for
keepin’ my nose clean.”

The driver s eyes slipped over Joad’s face to memorize it.
“I never asked you nothin’ about it,” he said. “I mind my
own yard.”
“You can tell about it in every joint from here to Texola.”
He smiled. “So long, fella. You been a good guy. But look,
when you been in stir a little while, you can smell a question
cornin’ from hell to breakfast. You telegraphed yours the
first time you opened your trap.” He spatted the metal door
with the palm of his hand. “Thanks for the lift,” he said. “So
long.” He turned away and walked into the dirt road.
For a moment the driver stared after him, and then he
called, “Luck!” Joad waved his hand without looking
around. Then the motor roared up and the gears clicked and
the great red truck rolled heavily away.
concrete highway was edged with a mat of
I tangled, broken, dry grass, and the grass- heads were
§ heavy with oat beards to catch on a dog’s coat, and
foxtails to tangle in a horse’s fetlocks, and clover burrs to
fasten in sheep’s wool; sleeping life waiting to be spread and
dispersed, every seed armed with an appliance of dispersal
twisting darts and parachutes for the wind, little spears and
balls of tiny thorns, and all waiting for animals and for the
wind, for a man’s trouser cuff or the hem of a woman’s skirt,
all passive but armed with appliances of activity, still, but
each possessed of the anlage of movement.
The sun lay on the grass and warmed it, and in the shade
under the grass the insects moved, ants and ant lions to set
traps for them, grasshoppers to jump into the air and flick
their yellow wings for a second, sow bugs like little arma-
dillos, plodding restlessly on many tender feet. And over the
grass at the roadside a land turtle crawled, turning aside for
nothing, dragging his high-domed shell over the grass. His
hard legs and yellow-nailed feet threshed slowly through the
grass, not really walking, but boosting and dragging his shell
along. The barley beards slid off his shell, and the clover
burrs fell on him and rolled to the ground. His horny beak
was partly open, and his fierce, humorous eyes, under brows
like fingernails, stared straight ahead. He came over the grass
leaving a beaten trail behind him, and the hill, which was the
highway embankment, reared up ahead of him. For a mo-
ment he stopped, his head held high. He blinked and looked
up and down. At last he started to climb the embankment.
Front clawed feet reached forward but did not touch. The
hind feet kicked his shell along, and it scraped on the grass,
and on the gravel. As the embankment grew steeper and
steeper, the more frantic were the efforts of die land turtle.
Pushing hind legs strained and slipped, boosting the shell
along, and the horny head protruded as far as the neck could
stretch. Little by little the shell slid up the embankment until
at last a parapet cut straight across its line of march, the
shoulder of the road, a concrete wall four inches high. As
though they worked independently the hind legs pushed the
shell against the wall. The head upraised and peered over the
wall to the broad smooth plain of cement. Now the hands,
braced on top of the wall, strained and lifted, and the shell
came slowly up and rested its front end on the wall. For a.
moment the turtle rested. A red ant ran into the shell, into
the soft skin inside the shell, and suddenly head and legs
snapped in, and the armored tail clamped in sideways. The
red ant was crushed between body and legs. And one head
of wild oats was clamped into the shell by a front leg. For a
long moment the turtle lay still, and then the neck crept out
and the old humorous frowning eyes looked about and the
legs and tail came out. The back legs went to work, strain-
ing like elephant legs, and the shell tipped to an angle so that
the front legs could not reach the level cement plain. But
higher and higher the hind legs boosted it, until at last the
center of balance was reached, the front tipped down, the
front legs scratched at the pavement, and it was up. But the
head of wild oats was held by its stem around the front legs.

Now the going was easy, and all the legs worked, and the
shell boosted along, waggling from side to side. A sedan
driven by a forty-year old woman approached. She saw the,
turtle and swung to the right, off the highway, the wheels
screamed and a cloud of dust boiled up. Two wheels lifted
for a moment and then settled. The car skidded back onto
the road, and went on, but more slowly. The turtle had
jerked into its shell, but now it hurried on, for the highway
was burning hot.
And now a light truck approached, and as it came near,
the driver saw the turtle and swerved to hit it. His front
wheel struck the edge of the shell, flipped the turtle like a
tiddly-wink, spun it like a coin, and rolled it off the high-
way. The truck went back to its course along the right side.
Lying on its back, the turtle was tight in its shell for a long
time. But at last its legs waved in the air, reaching for some-
thing to pull it over. Its front foot caught a piece of quartz
and little by little the shell pulled over and flopped upright.
The wild oat head fell out and three of the spearhead seeds
stuck in the ground. And as the turtle crawled on down the
embankment, its shell dragged dirt over the seeds. The
turtle entered a dust road and jerked itself along, drawing a
wavy shallow trench in the dust with its shell. The old
humorous eyes looked ahead, and the horny beak opened a
little. His yellow toe nails slipped a fraction in the dust.
W HEN Joad heard the truck get under way,
gear climbing up to gear and the ground throb-
bing under the rubber beating of the tires, he
•stopped and turned about and watched it until it disappeared,
When it was out of sight he still watched the distance and the
blue air-shimmer. Thoughtfully he took the pint from his
pocket, unscrewed the metal cap, and sipped the whisky deli-
cately, running his tongue inside the bottle neck, and then
around his lips, to gather in any flavor that might have es-
caped him. He said experimentally, “There we spied a nig-
ger— ” and that was all he could remember. At last he turned
about and faced the dusty side road that cut off at right angles
through the fields. The sun was hot, and no wind stirred the
. sifted dust. The road was cut with furrows where dust had
slid and settled back into the wheel tracks. Joad took a few
steps, and the flourlike dust spurted up in front of his new
yellow shoes, and the yellowness was disappearing under
gray dust.
He leaned down and untied the laces, slipped off first one
shoe and then the other. And he worked his damp feet corn*
fortably in the hot dry dust until little spurts of it came up
between his toes, and until the skin on his feet tightened with
dryness. He took off his coat and wrapped his shoes in it and
slipped the bundle under his arm. And at last he moved up
the road, shooting the dust ahead of him, making a cloud that
hung low to the ground behind him.
The right of way was fenced, two strands of barbed wire
on willow poles. The poles were crooked and badly trimmed.
Whenever a crotch came to the proper height the wire lay
in it, and where there was no crotch the barbed wire was
lashed to the post with rusty baling wire. Beyond the fence,
the com lay beaten down by wind and heat and drought,
and the cups where leaf joined stalk were filled with dust.
Joad plodded along, dragging his cloud of dust behind him.
A little bit ahead he saw the high-domed shell of a land turtle,
crawling slowly along through the dust, its legs working
stiffly and jerkily. Joad stopped to watch it, and his shadow t?
fell on the turtle. Instantly head and legs were withdrawn
*£nd the short thick tail clamped sideways into the shell.
Joad picked it up and turned it over. The back was brown-
gray, like the dust, but the underside of the shell was creamy
yellow, clean and smooth. Joad shifted his bundle high tinder
his arm and stroked the smooth undershell with his finger,
and he pressed it. It was softer than the back. The hard old
head came out and tried to look at the pressing finger, and
the legs waved wildly. The turtle wetted on Joad’s hand and
struggled uselessly in the air. Joad turned it back upright
and rolled it up in his coat with his shoes. He could feel it
pressing and struggling and fussing under his arm. He moved
ahead more quickly now, dragging his heels a little in the
'fine dust.
' Ahead of him, beside the road, a scrawny, dusty willow
tree cast a speckled shade. Joad could see it ahead of him, its
poor branches curving over the way, its load of leaves tat-
tered and scraggly as a molting chicken. Joad was sweating
now. His blue shirt darkened down his back and under his
arms. He pulled at the visor of his cap and creased it in the
middle, breaking its cardboard lining so completely that it
could never look new again. And his steps took on new speed
and intent toward the shade of the distant willow tree.
At the willow he knew there would be shade, at least one
hard bar of absolute shade thrown by the trunk, since the sun
had passed its zenith. The sun whipped the back of his neck
now and made a little humming in his head. He could not see
the base of the tree, for it grew out of a little swale that held
water longer than the level places. Joad speeded his pace
against the sun, and he started down the declivity. He
slowed cautiously, for the bar of absolute shade was taken,

, A man sat on the ground, leaning against the trunk of the
tree. His legs were crossed and one bare foot extended nearly
as high as his head. He did not hear Joad approaching, for he
was whistling solemnly the tune of “Yes, Sir, That’s My
Baby.” His extended foot swung slowly up and down in the
tempo. It was not dance tempo. He stopped whistling and
sang in an easy thin tenor:
Jesus is my Saviour now,”

Joad had moved into the imperfect shade of the molting
leaves before the man heard him coming, stopped his song,
and turned his head. It was a long.. head r b ony,- tight of skin,
and set on a neck as stringy and muscular as a celery stalk,
f, His eyeballs were heavy and protruding; the lids stretched
to cover them, and the lids were raw and red. His cheeks
were brown and shiny and hairless and his mouth full-
humorous or sensual. The nose, beaked and hard v stretched
the skin so tightly that the bridge showed white. There
was no perspiration on the face, not even on the tall pale
forehead. It was an abnormally high forehead, lined with
delicate blue veins at the temples. Fully half of the face
was above the eyes. His stiff gray hair was mussed back from
his brow as though he had combed it back with his lingers.
For clothes he wore overalls and a blue shirt. A denim coat
with brass buttons and a spotted brown hat creased like a
pork pie lay on the ground beside him. Canvas sneakers, gray
with dust, lay near by where they had fallen when they were
kicked off.

The man looked long at Joad. The light seemed to go far
into his brown eyes, and it picked out little golden specks
deep in the irises. The strained bundle of neck muscles stood
out.

Joad stood still in the speckled shade. He took off his cap
and mopped his wet face with it and dropped it and his rolled
coat on the ground.

The man in the absolute shade uncrossed his legs and dug
vvith his toes at the earth.

Joad said, “Hi. It’s hotter’n hell on the road.”

The seated man stared questioningly at him. “Now ain’t
you young Tom Joad— ol’ Tom’s boy?”

“Yeah,” said Joad. “All the way. Coin 5 home now.”

“You wouldn’ remember me, I guess,” the man said. He
smiled and his full lips revealed great horse teeth. “Oh, no,
you wouldn’t remember. You was always too busy pullin’
little girls’ pigtails when I give you the Holy Sperit. You was
all wropped up in yankin’ that pigtail out by the roots. You
maybe don’t recollect, but I do. The two of you come to
Jesus at once ’cause of that pigtail yankin’. Baptized both of
you in the irrigation ditch at once. Fightin* an’ yellin’ like a
couple a cats.”

Joad looked at him with drooped eyes* and then he
laughed. 4 Why, you’re the preacher. You’re the preacher. I
jus’ passed a recollection about you to a guy not an hour
“I was a preacher,” said the man seriously. “Reverend Jim
Casy— was a Burning Busher. Used to howl out the name of
Jesus to glory. And used to get an irrigation ditch so squirm-
in’ full of repented sinners half of ’em like to drownded.
But not no more,” he sighed. “Just Jim Casy now. Ain’t got
the call no more. Got a lot of sinful idears— but they seem
kinda sensible.”

Joad said, “You’re bound to get idears if you go thinkin’
about stuff. Sure I remember you. You use ta give a good
meetin’. I recollect one time you give a whole sermon
walkin’ around on your hands, yellin’ your head off. Ma
favored you more than anybody. An’ Granma says you was
just lousy with the spirit.” Joad dug at his rolled coat and
found the pocket and brought out his pint. The turtle moved
a leg but he wrapped it up tightly. He unscrewed the cap and
held out the bottle. “Have a little snort?”

Casy took the bottle and regarded it broodingly. “I ain’t
preachin’ no more much. The sperit ain’t in the people much
no more; and worse’n that, the sperit ain’t in me no more.
’Course now an’ again the sperit gets movin’ an’ I rip out a
meetin’, or when folks sets out food I give ’em a grace, but
my heart ain’t in it. I on’y do it ’cause they expect it”

Joad mopped his face with his cap again. “You ain’t too
damn holy to take a drink, are you?” he asked.

Casy seemed to see the bottle for the first time. He tilted
it and took three big swallows. “Nice drinkin’ liquor,” he

said.

“Ought to be,” said Joad. “That’s fact’ry liquor. Cost a
buck.”

Casy took another swallow before he passed the bottle
back. “Yes, sir!” he said. “Yes, sir!”

Joad took the bottle from him, and in politeness did not
wipe the neck with his sleeve before he drank. He squatted
on his hams and set the bottle upright against his coat roll.
His fingers found a twig with which to draw his thoughts
on the ground; He swept the leaves from a square and
smoothed the dust. And he drew angles and made little cir-
cles. “I ain’t seen you in a long time,” he said.

“Nobody seen me,” said the preacher. “I went off alone,
an’ I sat and figured. The sperit’s strong in me, on’y it ain’t
the same. I ain’t so sure of a lot of things.” He sat up
straighter against the tree. His bony hand dug its way like a
squirrel into his overall pocket, brought out a black, bitten
plug of tobacco. Carefully he brushed off bits of straw and
gray pocket fuzz before he bit off a comer and settled the
quid into his cheek. Joad waved his stick in negation when
the plug was held out to him. The turtle dug at the rolled
coat. Casy looked over at the stirring garment.. “What you
got there— a chicken? You’ll smother it.”

Joad rolled the coat up more tightly. “An old turtle,” he
said. “Picked him up on the road. An old bulldozer. Thought
I’d take ’im to my little brother. Kids like turtles.”

The preacher nodded his head slowly. “Every kid got a
turtle some time or other. Nobody can’t keep a turtle though.
They work at it and work at it, and at last one day they get
out and away they go-off somewheres. It’s like me. I
wouldn’ take the good ol’ gospel that was just layin’ there




The Grapes of Wrath 29

to my hand. I got to be pickin’ at it an’ workin’ at it until I
got it all tore down. Here I got the sperit sometimes an’
nothin’ to preach about. I got the call to lead people, an’
no place to lead ’em.”

“Lead, ’em around and around,” said Joad. “Sling ’em in
the irrigation ditch. Tell ’em they’ll bum in hell if they don’t
think like you. What the hell you want to lead ’em some-
place for? jus’ lead ’em.” The straight trunk shade had
stretched out along the ground. Joad moved gratefully into
it and squatted on his hams and made a new smooth place on
which to draw his thoughts with a stick. A thick-furred yel-
low shepherd dog came trotting down the road, head low.
tongue lolling and dripping. Its tail hung limply curled, and
it panted loudly. Joad whistled at it, but it only dropped its
head an inch and trotted fast toward some definite destina*
tion. “Coin’ someplace,” Joad explained, a little piqued.
'Coin’ for home maybe.”

The preacher could not be thrown from his subject.
u Goin’ someplace,” he repeated. “That’s right, he’s goin’
someplace. Me— I don’t know where I’m goin\ Tell you
what— I used ta get the people jumpin’ an’ talkin’ in tongues,
an’ glory-shoutin’ till they just fell down an’ passed out. An’
some I’d baptize to bring ’em to. An’ then-you know what
I’d do? I’d take one of them girls out in the grass, an’ I’d lay
with her. Done it ever’ time. Then I’d feel bad, an’ I’d pray
an’ pray, but it didn’t do no good. Come the nex’ time, them
an’, me was full of the sperit, I’d do it again. I figgered there
just wasn’t no hope for me, an’ I was a damned o Y hypocrite.
But I didn’t mean to be.”

Joad smiled and his long teeth parted and he licked his
lips. “There ain’t nothing like a good hot meetin’ for pushin f
’em over,” he said. “I done that myself.”
Casy leaned forward excitedly. “You see,” he cried, “I
seen it was that way, an’ I started thinkin’.” He waved his
bony big-knuckled hand up and down in a patting gesture.
“I got to thinkin’ like this— ‘Here’s me preachin’ grace. An’
here’s them people gettin’ grace so hard they’re jumpin’ an’
shoutin’. Now they say layin’ up with a girl comes from the
devil. But the more grace a girl got in her, the quicker she
wants to go out in the grass.’ An’ I got to thinkin’ how in
hell, s’cuse me, how can the devil get in when a girl is so full
of the Holy Sperit that it’s spoutin’ out of her nose an’ ears.
You’d think that’d be one time when the devil didn’t stand a
snowball’s chance in hell. But there it was.” His eyes were
shining with excitement. He worked his cheeks for a mo-
ment and then spat into the dust, and the gob of spit rolled
over and over, picking up dust until it looked like a round
dry little pellet. The preacher spread out his hand and looked
at his palm as though he were reading a book. “An’ there’s
me,” he went on softly. “There’s me with all them people’s
souls in my han’— responsible an’ feelin’ my responsibility— an 5
ever’ time, I lay with one of them girls.” He looked over at
Joad and his face looked helpless. His expression asked for
help.

Joad carefully drew the torso of a woman in the dirt,
breasts, hips, pelvis. “I wasn’t never a preacher,” he said. “I
never let nothin’ get by when I could catch it. An’ I never
had no idears about it except I was goddamn glad when I
got one.”

“But you wasn’t a preacher,” Casy insisted. “A girl was
just a girl to you. They wasn’t nothin’ to you. But to me
they was holy vessels. I was savin’ their souls. An’ here with
all that responsibility on me I’d just get ’em frothin’ with the
Holy Sperit, an’ then I’d take ’em out in the grass.”



The Grapes of Wrath 3 1

“Maybe I should of been a preacher,” said Joad. He
brought out his tobacco and papers and rolled a cigarette. He
lighted it and squinted through the smoke at the preacher. “1
been a long time without a girl,” he said. “It’s gonna take
(>ome catchin’ up.”

Casy continued, “It worried me till I couldn’t get no sleep.
Here Fd go to preachin’ and Fd say, ‘By God, this time I


: gonna do it.’ And right while I said it, I knowed I was.”


“You should a got a wife,” said Joad. “Preacher an’ his
wife stayed at our place one time, jehovites they was. Slep’
upstairs. Held meetin’s in our barnyard. Us kids would listen.
That preacher’s missus took a godawful poundin’ after ever’
night meetinh”

“I’m glad you toF me,” said Casy. “I use to think it was
jus’ me. Finally it give me such pain I quit an’ went off by
myself an’ give her a damn good thinkin about.” He doubled
up his legs and scratched between his dry dusty toes. “I says
to myself, ‘What’s gnawin’ you? Is it the screwin’?’ An’ I
says, ‘No, it’s the sin.’ An’ I says, ‘Why is it that when a fella
ought to be just about mule-ass proof against sin, an’ all full
up of Jesus, why is it that’s the time a fella gets fingerin’ his
pants buttons?’ ” He laid two fingers down in his palm in
rhythm, as though he gently placed each word there side by
side. “I says, ‘Maybe it ain’t a sin. Maybe it’s just the way
folks is. Maybe we been whippin’ the hell out of ourselves
for nothin’.’ An’ I thought how some sisters took to bearin’
theirselves with a three-foot shag of bobwire. An’ I thought
how maybe they liked to hurt themselves, an’ maybe I liked
to hurt myself. Well, I was lay in’ under a tree when I figured
that out, and I went to sleep. And it come night, an’ it was
dark when I come to. They was a coyote squawkin’ near by.
Before I knowed it, I was sayin’ out loud, ‘The hell with it!

There ain’t no sin and there ain’t no virtue. There’s just stuff

people do. It’s all part of the same thing. And some of the

things folks do is nice, and some ain’t nice, but that’s as far

as any man got a right to say.’ ” He paused and looked up

from the palm of his hand, where he had laid down the

words.

Joad was grinning at him, but Joad’s eyes were sharp and
interested, too. “You give her a goin’-over,” he said. “You
figured her out.” .

Casy spoke again, and his voice rang with pain and con-
fusion. “I says, What’s this call, this spent?’ An’ I says,
It’s love. I love people so much I’m fit to bust, sometimes.’
&n’ I says, ‘Don’t you love Jesus?’ Well, I thought an’
thought, an’ finally I says, ‘No, I don’t know nobody name’
Jesus. I know a bunch of stories, but I only love people. An'
sometimes I love ’em fit to bust, an’ I want to make ’em
happy, so I been preachin’ somepin I thought would make
’em happy.’ An’ then— I been talkin’ a hell of a lot. Maybe
you wonder about me using bad words. Well, they ain’t bad
to me no more. They’re jus’ words folks use, an’ they don’t
mean nothing bad with ’em. Anyways, I’ll tell you one more
thing I thought out; an’ from a preacher it’s the most unre-
ligious thing, and I can’t be a preacher no more because I
thought it an’ I believe it ”

“What’s that?” Joad asked.

Casy looked shyly at him. “If it hits you wrong, don’t take
no offense at it, will you?”

“I don’t take no offense ’cept a bust in the nose,” said Joad.
“What did you figger?”

“I hggered about the Holy Sperit and the Jesus road. I
figgered, ‘Why do we got to hang it on God or Jesus?
Maybe,’ I figgered, ‘maybe it’s all men an’ all women we love;
maybe that s the Holy Sperit— the human sperit— the whole
shebang. Maybe all men got one big soul ever’body’s a part
of. Now I sat there thinkin’ it, an’ all of a suddent — I knew
it. I knew it so deep down that it was true, and I still know
it.”

Joad’s eyes dropped to the ground, as though he could not
meet the naked honesty in the preacher’s eyes. “You can’t
hold no church with idears like that,” he said. “People would
drive you out of the country with idears like that. Jumpin’
an yellin . That s what folks like. Makes ’em feel swell.
When Granma got to talkin’ in tongues, you couldn’t tie her
down. She could knock over a full-growed deacon with her
fist.”

Casy regarded him broodingly. “Somepin I like to ast
you,” he said. “Somepin that been eatin’ on me.”

“Go ahead. I’ll talk, sometimes.”

_ “Well”— the preacher said slowly-“here’s you that I bap-
tized right when I was in the glory roof-tree. Got little
hunks of Jesus jumpin’ outa my mouth that day. You won’t
remember ’cause you was busy pullin’ that pigtail.”

“I remember,” said Joad. “That was Susy Little. She bust
my finger a year later.”

“Well— did you take any good outa that baptizin’? Was
your ways better?”

Joad thought about it. “No-o-o, can’t say as I felt any-
thing.”

“Well— did you take any bad from it? Think hard.”

Joad picked up the bottle and took a swig. “They wasn’t
nothing in it, good or bad. I just had fun.” He handed the
flask to the preacher.

He sighed and drank and looked at the low level of the
'whisky and took another tiny drink. “That’s good,” he said
Joad looked over toward his coat and saw the turtle, free
of the cloth and hurrying away in the direction he had been
following when Joad found him. Joad watched him for a
moment and then got slowly to his feet and retrieved him
and wrapped him in the coat again. “I ain’t got no present
for the kids,” he said. “Nothin’ but this ok turtle.”

“it’s a funny thing,” the preacher said. “I was thimkln’
about of Tom Joad when you come along. Thinkin’ I’d
call in on him.. I used to think he was a godless man. How is
Tom?” .

“I don’t know how he is. I ain’t been home in four years.”

“Didn’t he write to you?”

joad was embarrassed. “Well, Pa wasn’t no hand to write
for pretty, or to write for writin’. He’d sign up his name as
nice as anybody, an’ lick his pencil. But Pa never did write
no letters. He always says what he couldn’ tell a fella with
his mouth wasn’t worth leanin’ on no pencil about.”

“Been out travelin’ around?” Casy asked.

Joad regarded him suspiciously. “Didn’t you hear about
me? I was in all the papers.”

•“No— I never. What?” He jerked one leg over the other
and settled lower against the tree. The afternoon was ad-
vancing rapidly, and a richer tone was growing on the sun.

Joad said pleasantly, “Might’s well tell you now an’ get
it over with. But if you was still preachin’ I wouldn’t tell,
fear you get prayin’ over me.” Pie drained the last of the
pint and flung it from him, and the flat brown bottle skidded
lightly over the dust. “I been in McAlester them four years.”

Casy swung around to him, and his brows lowered so that
his tall forehead seemed even taller. “Ain’t wantin’ to talk
about it, huh? I won’t ask you no questions, if you done
something bad — ”

“I’d do what I done-again,” said Joad. “I killed a guy in
a fight. We was drunk at a dance. He got a knife in me, an’
1 killed him with a shovel that was layin’ there. Knocked his
head plumb to squash.”

Casy’s eyebrows resumed their normal level. “You ain’t
ashamed of nothin’ then?”

No, said Joad, “I ain’t. I got seven years, account of he
had a knife in me. Got out in four— parole.”

“Then you ain’t heard nothin’ about your folks for four
years?”

“Oh, I heard. Ma sent me a card two years ago, an’ las’
Christmas Granma sent a card. Jesus, the guys in the cell
block laughed! Had a tree an’ shiny stuff looks like 9ww.
It says in po’try:

“ ‘Merry Christmas, purty child,

Jesus meek an’ Jesus mild,

Underneath the Christmas tree
There’s a gif’ for you from me.’

I guess Granma never read it. Prob’Iy got it from a drummer
an’ picked out the one with the mos’ shiny stuff on it. The
guys in my cell block goddamn near died laughin’. Jesus
Meek they called me after that. Granma never meant it
funny; she jus’ figgered it was so purty she wouldn’ bother
to read it. She lost her glasses the year I went up. Maybe she
never did find ’em.”

“How they treat you in McAlester?” Casy asked.

“Oh, awright. You eat regular, an’ get clean clothes, and
there s places to take a bath. It’s pretty nice some ways.
Makes it hard not havin’ no women.” Suddenly he laughed.
'They was a guy paroled,” he said. “ ’Bout a month he’s
hack for breakin’ parole. A guy ast him why he bust his
parole. Well, hell,’ he says. They got no conveniences at
my old man’s place. Got no ’lectric lights, got no shower
baths. There ain’t no books, an’ the food’s lousy.’ Says he
come back where they got a few conveniences an’ he eats
regular. He says it makes him feel lonesome out there in the
open havin’ to think what to do next. So he stole a car an’
come back.” Joad got out his tobacco and blew a brown
paper free of the pack and rolled a cigarette. “The guy’s
right, too,” he said. “Las’ night, thinkin’ where I’m gonna
sleep, I got scared. An’ I got thinkin’ about my bunk, an’ I
wonder what the stir-bug I got for a cell mate is doin’. Me
an’ some guys had a Strang band goin’. Good one. Guy said
we ought to go on the radio. An’ this mornin’ I didn’t know
what time to get up. Jus’ laid there waitin’ for the bell to
go off.”
Casy chuckled. “Fella can get so he misses the noise of a
saw mill.”
The yellowing, dusty, afternoon light put a golden color
on the land. The cornstalks looked golden. A flight of swal-
lows swooped overhead toward some waterhole. The turtle
in Joad’s coat began a new campaign of escape. Joad creased
the visor of his cap. It was getting the long protruding curve
of a crow’s beak now. “Guess I’ll mosey along,” he said. “I
hate to hit the sun, but it ain’t so bad now.”
Casy pulled himself together. “I ain’t seen ol’ Tom in a
bug’s age,” he said. “I was gonna look in on him anyways. I
brang Jesus to your folks for a long time, an’ I never took
up a collection nor nothin’ but a bite to eat.”
“Come along,” said Joad. “Pa’ll be glad to see you. He
always said you got too long a pecker for a preacher.” He
picked up his coat roll and tightened it snugly about his shoes
and turtle.
Casy gathered in his canvas sneakers and shoved his bare
feet into them. “I ain’t got your confidence,” he said. “Firs •
always scared there’s wire or glass under the dust. I don’t
know nothin’ 1 hate so much as a cut toe.”
They hesitated on the edge of the shade and then they
plunged into the yellow sunlight like two swimmers hasten-
ing to get to shore. After a few fast steps they slowed to a
gentle, thoughtful pace. The cornstalks threw gray shadows
sideways now, and the raw smell of hot dust was in the air,
The com field ended and dark green cotton took its place,
dark green leaves through a film of dust, and the bolls form-
ing. It was spotty cotton, thick in the low places where
water had stood, and bare on the high places. The plants
strove against the sun. And distance, toward the horizon, was
tan to invisibility. The dust road stretched out ahead of
them, waving up and down. The. willows of a stream lined
across the west, and to the northwest a fallow section was
going back to sparse brush. But the smell of burned dust was
in the air, and the air was dry, so that mucus in the nose dried
to a crust, and the eyes watered to keep the eyeballs from
drying out.
Casy said, “See how good the corn come along until the
dust got up. Been a dinger of a crop.”
“Ever’ year,” said Joad. “Ever’ year I can remember, we
had a good crop cornin’ an’ it never come. Grampa says she
was good the first five plowin’s, while the wild grass was still
in her.” The road dropped down a little hill and climbed up
another rolling hill.
Casy said, “OF Tom’s house can’t be more’n a mile from
here. Ain’t she over that third rise?”
“Sure,” said joad. “ ’Less somebody stole it, like Pa stole
it.”
“Your pa stole it?”
“Sure, got it a mile an’ a half east of here an’ drug it. Was
a family livin’ there, an’ they moved away. Grampa an’ Pa
an’ my brother Noah like to took the whole house, but she
wouldn’ come. They only got part of her. That’s why she
looks so funny on one end. They cut her in two an’ drug
her over with twelve head of horses and two mules. They
was goin’ back for the other half an’ stick her together again,
but before they got there Wink Manley come with his boys
and stole the other half. Pa an’ Grampa was pretty sore, but
a little later them an’ Wink got drunk together an’ laughed
their heads off about it. Wink, he says his house is at stud,
an’ if we’ll bring our’n over an’ breed ’em we’ll maybe gee
a litter of crap houses. Wink was a great oY fella when he
was drunk. After that him an’ Pa an’ Grampa was friends.
Got drunk together ever’ chance they got.”
“Tom’s a great one,” Casy agreed. They plodded dustily
on down to the bottom of the draw, and then slowed their
steps for the rise. Casy wiped his forehead with his sleeve
and put on his flat-topped hat again. “Yes,” he repeated,
“Tom was a great one. For a godless man he was a great one.
I seen him in meetin’ sometimes when the sperit got into
him just a little, an’ I seen him take ten-twelve foot jumps,,
I tell you when o Y Tom got a dose of the Holy Sperit you
got to move fast to keep from gettin’ run down an’ tromped.
Jumpy as a stud horse in a box stall.”
They topped the next rise and the road dropped into an
old water-cut, ugly and raw, a ragged course, and freshet
scars cutting into it from both sides. A few stones were in
the crossing. Joad minced across in his bare feet. “Yon talk
about Pa,” he said. “Maybe you never seen Uncle John the
time they baptized him over to Polk’s place. Why, he got to
plungin’ an’ jumpin’. Jumped over a feeny bush as big as a
piana. Over he’d jump, an’ back he’d jump, howlin’ like a
dog-wolf in moon time. Well, Pa seen him, an’ Pa, he flggers
he’s the bes’ Jesus-jumper in these parts. So Pa picks out a
feeny bush ’bout twicet as big as Uncle John’s feeny
bush, and Pa lets out a squawk like a sow litterin’ broken
bottles, an’ he takes a run at that feeny bush an’ clears her
an’ bust his right leg. That took the sperit out of Pa.
Preacher wants to pray it set, but Pa says, no, by God, he’d
got his heart full of havin’ a doctor. Well, they wasn’t a
doctor, but they was a travelin’ dentist, an’ he set her.
Preacher give her a prayin’ over anyways.”
